---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.14.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---


# Intro to NLP- representing text data

```{code-cell} ipython3
from sklearn.feature_extraction import text
from sklearn.metrics.pairwise import euclidean_distances
from sklearn import datasets
import pandas as pd
from sklearn.naive_bayes import MultinomialNB
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split

ng_X,ng_y = datasets.fetch_20newsgroups(categories =['comp.graphics','sci.crypt'],
                                       return_X_y = True)
```


## Text as Data

Let's mak a small dataset of sentences
```{code-cell} ipython3

sentences = [
'The semester is almost over. - Professor Brown', 
'The weather is getting much warmer outside. - Ben',
'Dr. Pepper is the best soda ever - Ebrahima', 
'Only a few more weeks before graduation. -Gabe',
'Hello friends. -Zach', 
'Mr. Owl ate my metal worm. -Sath',
'I wonder what is for dinner? - Vinai', 
'Hello everyone- jay ', 
]
```


How can we analyze these? All of the machine leanring models we have seen only use numerical features organized into a table with one row per samplea and one column per feature.

That's actually generally true.  ALl ML models require numerical features, at some point. The process of taking data that is not numerical and tabular, which is called unstrucutred, into strucutred (tabular) format we require is called feature extraction.  There are many, many ways to do that.  We'll see a few over the course of the rest of the semester.  Some more advanced models hide the feature extraction, by putting it in the same function, but it's always there.

```{code-cell} ipython3
sentences[0]
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
s1 = sentences[0]
```

## Terms


- document: unit of text we’re analyzing (one sample)
- token: sequence of characters in some particular document that are grouped together as a useful semantic unit for processing (basically a word)
- stop words: no meaning, we don’t need them (like a, the, an,). Note that this is context dependent
- dictionary: all of the possible words that a given system knows how to process



## Bag of Words Representionat

We're going to learn a represetnation called the bag of words.  It ignores the order of the words within a document. To do this, we'll first extract all of the tokens (tokenize) the docuemtns and then count how mnay times each word appears.  This will be our numerical representation of the data.  

````{margin}
```{admonition} Further Reading
[Transformers](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/data_transforms.html) are another broad class of sklearn objects.  We've seen Estimators mostly so far.
We're focusing on the [text feature extraction](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/feature_extraction.html#text-feature-extraction) for now.
```
````
Then we initialize our transformer, and use the fit transform method to fit the vectorizer model and apply it to this sentence.



```{code-cell} ipython3
counts = text.CountVectorizer()
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.fit_transform([s1])
```
We see it returns a sparse matrix.  A sparse matrix means that it has a lot of 0s or missing values in it and so we only represent the data.  If we were to represent all of the 0s or NAs we would have to use the same amount of mmory for a full matrix and a sparse on

Considr a matrix that's 10x10, that meand 100 total values to store if we store it dense.  If we have only a small number of values that are not 0, say 5%, storing all of that seems like a lot.  As a spars matrix, we can instead store the each value and its location.  So 5% is 5 values, but we store 3 values for it (value, column, row) for 15.  15 is still a lot less than 100.  So as long as less than 1/3 of th values are used sparse format is an advantage.  


```{code-cell} ipython3
mfull = np.asarray([[1,0,0,0,0],[0,0,1,0,0],[0,0,0,1,0]])
```

but as a sparse matrix, we could store fewer values.
```{code-cell} ipython3
[[0,0,1],[1,2,1],[2,3,1]]# the above
```
Text data will often be sparse. 


So any matrix where the number of total values is low enough, we can store it more efficiently by tracking the locations and values instead of all of the zeros.

To actually see it though we have to cast out of that into a regular array.


```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.fit_transform([s1]).toarray()
```

We can also examine attributes of the object.
````{margin}
```{tip}
Notice that we keep using the same tools over and over to explore how things work.  You can do this on your own, when you're learning new things. Example
code is readily available online but not all of it is well documented or
clearly explained.

Also, in a job, much, much, more of your time will be spent reading code than writing code from scratch. These strategies will help you get familiar with a new code base and get up to speed faster.
```
````


```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.vocabulary_
```

We see that what it does is creates an ordered (the values are the order) list of words as the parameters of this model (ending in `_` is an attribute of the object or parameter of the model).

it puts the words in the `vocabulary_` attribute (aka the {term}`dictionary`) in alphabetical order.

## Reformatting data
Now we can transform the whole dataset,first we will process it a little.

```{code-cell} ipython3
sentences_split = [sent_attr.split('-') for sent_attr in sentences]
sentences_split
```

```{code-cell} ipython3

text_dict = {attr.strip():sentence.strip() for sentence,attr in sentences_split}
text_dict
```

and now transform 

```{code-cell} ipython3
mat = counts.fit_transform(text_dict.values()).toarray()
mat
```

From this we can see that the representation is the count of how many times each word appears.

Now we can apply it to all of the sentences, or our whole {term}`corpus`. We can get the dictionary out in order using the `get_feature_names_out` method. This method has a generic name, not specific to text, because it's a property of transformers in general.


```{code-cell} ipython3
counts.get_feature_names_out()
```
We can use a dataframe again to see this more easily. We can put labels on both the index and the column headings.


```{code-cell} ipython3
sentence_df = pd.DataFrame(data = mat, columns = counts.get_feature_names_out(),
                          index = text_dict.keys())
sentence_df
```

## Basic text analysis 

We can find the most common word

One guess
```{code-cell} ipython3
sentence_df.max()
```
This is the maximum number of times each word appears in single "document", but it's also not sorted, it's alphabetical.

This shows the word that appears the most times.


To get what we want we need to sum, which by default is along the columns, or per word. 
```{code-cell} ipython3
sentence_df.sum(axis=0).sort_values(ascending=False)
```

Then we get the location of the max with idx max. 
```{code-cell} ipython3
sentence_df.sum().idxmax()
```

What is the total number of unique words across all sentences?

```{code-cell} ipython3
_, n_unique = sentence_df.shape
n_unique
```

this is also the *size of the dictionary*

We can get the total number of words in all of the sentences by summing twice. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
sentence_df.sum().sum()
```

Who's sentence had the most words in it?

```{code-cell} ipython3
sentence_df.sum(axis=1)
```
summing across rows shows how many words per sentence. 


## Distances in text
We can now use a distance function to calculate how far apart the different sentences are.


```{code-cell} ipython3
dists = euclidean_distances(sentence_df)
dists
```

This distance is only int terms of actual reused words.  It does not contain anything about the meaning of the words


We can make this eaiser to read by making it a Data Frame.
```{code-cell} ipython3
dist_df = pd.DataFrame(data=dists, index= text_dict.keys(),
                       columns=text_dict.keys())
dist_df
```

Who wrote the most similar to me? which two were most similar to one another? 

```{code-cell} ipython3
text_dict
```

```{code-cell} ipython3

```
